---
title: Right Consents Overview
permalink: /docs/overview-guide/
excerpt: "Instructions for understanding Right Consents concepts about collecting and managing consent."
header:
  og_image: /assets/images/overview-guide.jpg
toc: false
menu: true
---

Learn the main concepts of consent collect in Right Consents and how to start using it.

- Understand the main steps about consent management
- Start using Right Consents

## Prerequisites

To complete this guide you need :

- Roughly 10 minutes

## Overview

In this guide you will discover the concept of a **consent model** and its components. You will use the backoffice application to start defining your **consent elements library**.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/first-models-guide-overview.jpg" alt="First models with Right Consents - Overview" %}

This guide also covers some basic aspects of designing consent form layout by assembling your consent library elements in various way.

## Consent Collection

Consent collection is a more or less complex operation in the fact that it is either a **legal part** of a **data processing** but also a software piece that captures user choice at a specific time and holds that data for a relative long time in a standard way. The information generated by that software piece often need to be accessed or **disseminated to third part software** as user choices could have an impact on many pieces of an information system.

In order to ease the consent collection management, Right Consents defines all pieces of content collecting that takes part in that process like consent **model elements**, consent form layout, consent context, consent transaction, consent record and consent receipt.

We have identify three stage in the consent collection : defining consent elements, designing consent form and integrating forms into existing applications or websites.

### Stage One : define

The **first stage** is mainly handled by the data controller itself or the data protection officer (dpo) and is mainly an **administrative task**.

That stage aims to **define** all the elements that takes part in the consent collection. Those elements are purely declarative but have a specific structure and will be stored with the consent itself for a long time.

Right Consents helps to **define, manage and preserve** processings declaration but also of other informations like terms of service, preferences, legal information. Like a CMS, Right Consents will handle consent elements **lifecycle** to ensure the **legal validity** by assuming **auditing** and **versionning** but also by generating some **digital proofs** of any produced content.

Then, elements will be accessible throught the API for next stage or for other dissemination goals (processing registry).

### Stage two : design

The **second stage** is to assemble declared elements into specific layout that fits with the final integration goal.

For exemple, Terms of Service will be collected at startup of an application or at signup whereas some processing consent could be collected only when a specific service is requested. Some processings could be collected in the website where some other in a mobile application only.

Right Consents defines the notion of **Consent Context** that will holds all aspects of an application's pointcut that handles user consent need. Right Consents **backoffice** propose a **graphical tool** to design Consent Context.

At the end you can extract the generated JSON configuration for **integration** in any **external application**.

### Stage three : integrate

The **third stage** is handled by a **developer** and consist in using predefined Consent Context base configuration for integration into the target application.

As Consent Context contains also specific runtime information like the subject id, integration needs to be dynamic according to the target context. The Consent Context will then be pushed to the API to declare a new **Consent Transaction** that will act as a consent collection workflow.

The Consent Transaction will be aslo an **unique entry point** that will live during all the consent preservation time, allowing users to retrieve information about consent maybe years after. Integration may also require to query end user choices at some points of an user experience.

Once the transaction is committed, specific pieces of informations are generated : some **Consent Records** and a **Consent Receipt**.

## What's next?

In this guide we have seen an overview of the consent collection process and its different stages in Right Consents.

In addition you could now check other guides like:

- [First Models Guide]({% link _docs/102-first-models-guide.md %})
- [Discover the API Guide]({% link _docs/103-discover-api-guide.md %})
